[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger this new
point of view that we're developing towards linear
algebra and Matrix Theory also gives us new
insight into the nature of vectors that's what
we're going to be talking about today so we're
going to revisit this subject that we originally
talked about in math foundations 30 quite a long
time ago video called what exactly is a vector and
we're going to look at this very important Central
kind of notion in a new way so back then we had a
very geometrical point of view talk about a plane
points represented with square brackets like this
point here this point here this is 1 one this is
32 and then this line segment joining a to B we
can think of that as actually just an ordered
pair of points it really only depends on A and
B so that's one way of thinking about it that's
how we thought about vectors back then and when we
want to work algebraically we take the difference
between the coordinates of the points to arrive
at this Vector 21 two over in the X Direction
one up in the y direction so it's a a measure
of a relative position between two points this
is a very nice geometrical approach to vectors
and it leads to an algebraic operations with
vectors such as taking addition of vectors or
scalar multiples of vectors or more generally
taking linear combinations so for example if V
is the vector 21 and U is the vector minus1 14
then we can create something like 3 V + 2 U 3
2 1 + 2 -1 4 to get the vector 411 just working
componentwise so in this video today we want to
have another look at this story motivated by our
understanding about data structures we have now
more sensitivity about building things up and how
we actually concretely can construct things from
simpler things by putting them in the appropriate
kinds of boxes or data structures and we're going
to see that a new kind of object emerges a very
Central object called a vexel vexels are the
one-dimensional analog of maxel all right so one
approach two vectors from a maxel point of view
is to think of vectors as being sort of maxel
with just one row or perhaps one column so the
two vectors that we were considering could be
thought of in terms of maxel this way V could
be the maxel 21 and you could be the maxel -4
in order for that to work obviously we have to
extend our notion of multiset because previously
we were thinking of a Max as being a multiset
of pixels and the multiplicities involved in that
multiset had to be natural numbers or zero okay
but we've seen that in certain circumstances it's
natural and useful to extend the multiplicities
that objects are allowed to have in a multiset
to also include negative numbers if we do that
then we can regard this thing here as something
that's not so shocking it's -1 * the maxel E1 1
1 + 4 * the max E12 V here is 2 E11 + E12 and
then we could uh take linear combinations of
things like this just in the context of M set
operations because that's what we're really
doing so we could take 3 * this one plus 2
* this one and we would algebraically work
out that that's 4 E11 + 1112 or 5 V minus U we
can also take that kind of linear combination
5 * this one minus one of these and again we
just work with the e11s and e12s separately
so there's 10 of them here and plus one
that' be 11 e11s Al together and there's
5 e12s here and we're subtracting four e12s
for a total of plus one E12 okay so this is
something we could do we could regard vectors
as just maxel supported on one row or column
while tempting to do this it turns out in my
opinion that we should not do this okay this
is not really the right way of thinking about
vectors there is a more fundamental um better
way of proceeding so here are three reasons
why we might not want to go in that direction
the first is that there's a question about which
row or column we should be considering as the row
or column associated to the notion of vectors
so suppose we have a traditional Matrix vector
equation like this so this is a kind of equation
involving a 2x2 matrix a vector and the product
of this Matrix and this Vector is this Vector
here I remind you it's 3 * 1 + 4 * 5 which is
23 and 1 * 1 + 2 * 5 that's 11 now this sort
of traditional Matrix vector equation can be
interpreted in our maxal point of view this way
so we could replace this Matrix with this maxle
we could replace this Matrix with this maxle and
then the product of these two maxel is indeed this
maxel here so that's one maxle interpretation
of this but another maxle interpretation of
essentially the same equation is this one here
where we're taking that same 2x2 matrix and
writing down a maxle there but now this Vector
here gets interpreted as being the maxel with
elements in the second column so 0 1 05 and now
when we do the multiplication of these two maxel
we get this one here so what's happening here
is that the vectors over here are being replaced
with the second columns over here as opposed
to the first columns over here so there's then
this ambiguity should one choose the first row or
the second row or the 15th Row the first column
or the third column or the 319th column okay so
that's one issue another issue is that we would
then need to distinguish between row vectors and
column vectors all the time because well if we're
talking about rows or columns as vectors we have
to decide which of the two we're actually talking
about in any given situation and a third reason
is that it's unsatisfactory really to have a
one-dimensional concept that of a vector dependent
on a two-dimensional concept that of maxel we may
be motivated that way in terms of how the topic
arose but logically it makes more sense if we
start with the one-dimensional thing is being
simpler and then the two-dimensional story is
uh more complicated or enlarged version of the
one dimensional story and then so on all right
so on this slide here I'm really presenting
a quite a new way of thinking about things
and if you're a professional mathematician or a
graduate student don't be fooled by the seeming
simp licity of things here right this is really
a major new way of thinking about things and it
will take some time it may take several weeks
or even months for this to sink in so just let
it sit there for a little while and don't hurry
it okay it's very simple though so the main New
Concept that of a Singleton and a vexel so a
Singleton is a one list from natural numbers
for example here is a one list from natural
numbers a equals 1 there's a natural number
there's a list with one element that element is
from the natural numbers here's another one b
equal 37 it's a list with one natural number in
it so this is very much like what a pixel is a
pixel was a two list from natural numbers so this
is some kind of simpler more Elementary version
instead of having a two list from natural numbers
that's a pixel now we have a one list from natural
numbers and we're going to call that a Singleton
so notice that a Singleton like a equals n square
brackets n it is really a different mathematical
object from the natural number n there's the
natural number 37 and there's the Singleton square
brackets 37 and they are two very different things
okay the Singleton in particular is a list while
37 is a number so we're going introduce a type
let's say sing for Singleton and this is really
just the type that otherwise we might write this
way list Nat one it's a one list from natural
numbers it's a list with one element that element
comes from or has Type natural numbers Okay so
so a Singleton is an analog of a pixel what did
we do with maxel Theory well we took pixels and we
created multisets of them and we called them maxel
so we're going to do exactly the same thing here
we're going to say that a vexel now is a multiset
of Singletons a vexel is a multiset of Singletons
here for example is a vexel it's a multi set
inside it there's a Singleton there's another
Singleton there's another Singleton there's no
commas so it's unordered and repetitions are
allowed as evidenced by the square brackets
it's a multiset of Singletons here's another
multiset of Singleton another vexel 1 2 4 1 1
2 and I remind you the order here is unimportant
we can move them around and we're going to have a
new name for this new type vex and we could say
that that's also an M set from Singh it's an M
set whose objects are all Singletons okay this is
an important kind of new type of object mean it's
not as if people have not been considering these
things before but the important thing here is that
we're putting our finger on and saying this is an
important concept right this is a very fundamental
building block for mathematics we're going to
give it a name when to give it a type we're going
to put it Center place in our theory of linear
algebra we're going to see that it structures
lots of things for us in particular it employs
multiset Theory to help us build up essentially
linear spaces multisets are great objects and
we're exploiting the fact that we can work with
btic sets here or M sets exactly the same kinds of
considerations that we saw for maxel are going to
be happening here with these vexels so vexels are
M sets so we can add them we can take multiples
we can take linear combinations and in addition
to those sort of linear space operations we can
also take unions and intersections just as we did
for maxel so here is V and here is U the same ones
we had before then v+ U is just the M set that
we get as usual just by dump pumping the two M
sets together into a collective box so there's
now a one one from there and there's a one one
one from there there's a 2 two from here there's
a three from here and there's a four from there
we can take the intersection so we're looking at
minimums of multiplicities we can take the union
we're talking about maximums of multiplicities we
can Define one vexels same kind of thing that we
did with maxel we can identify that when we just
have a single natural number say n inside there's
the Singleton n and then this thing here is the
vexel containing that single Singleton we can call
that e subn so e sub one is this one e sub 2 is
this one and so on these are all vexels they are
particular kinds of vexels they're sort of like
BAS vexels if you like they are sort of building
blocks so arbitrary other vexels like this one
here can be written as linear combinations of
these vexels so this one here is 2 E1 plus E3
and this one is 3 E1 + 2 E2 plus E4 and then
when we take a linear combination like 5 V + 4 U
we can do it at the level of these linear things
here so we can just say well 5 times this one and
four times this one we can make a computation how
many e1s there are there's 10 and 12 so 22 e1s
how many e2s there will be there will be eight
of them uh how many e3s we get to multiply that by
five and how many e4s we have to multiply that by
four so we can express linear combinations and
the usual kind of linear algebra way regarding
these kind of as basis elements but they're just
names for particularly simple types of vexels so
very analogous to the maxle situation but in some
sense simpler and probably more fundamental when
we were developing maxel Theory what we did is we
said okay we have an M set of pixels what we can
do is we can record the various multiplicities
by putting them on a screen basically creating
a sort of a list or a two-dimensional list
of multiplicities that corresponds to the m
set so we have an M set over here and we
associate to it a list of multiplicities
and that was basically our picture of a axle so we
can do exactly the same kind of thing here but we
need to First create a one-dimensional analog of
a screen now there's at least two possibilities
here and we're going to call them freezes so
a freeze is a one-dimensional version of the
screen uh this is a kind of a classical term
used in architecture if you have some building
and maybe there's a strip near the top top with a
sort of essentially a one-dimensional strip often
with sculptures on it so that would have been
called a freeze in sort of classical architecture
so that's what a freeze means it's a essentially
a one-dimensional array of objects the objects
aren't necessarily exactly onedimensional they
can have some extent but there's really a sort
of a one-dimensional family of them object
object object all in a row so there's two
kinds of freezes which sort of naturally occur
to us here we could create a one-dimensional
strip like this and call it the row freeze where
we have positions marked corresponding to The
Singletons one Singleton 2 Singleton 3 Singleton
4 Etc or we could have a column freeze where we
have a column basically a one-dimensional ribbon
or strip going down with positions marked for The
Singletons 1 2 3 4 and so on so now given
of Exel V which is an M set of Singleton
we could represent that vexel as a picture we
could basically record how many ones there are
how many twos there are how many threes there
are and record those numbers as multiplicities
on our freeze so we could write V equal 2011 if
we were using the row freeze framework or if we
were interested in a column freeze framework
we would write two1 representing two 1es 02s
1 3 and Z fours so just as for maxel there's
something open-ended about these freeze diagrams
in the sense that we could add zeros if we
added another zero here it's not going to
change the underlying M set so the primary object
is definitely this thing here this is actually the
vexel okay these are pictures or representations
of the vexel and we see that we have a choice of
pictures here well even in the maxel world we
could have had lots of choices when we chose
to arrange our screen so that the sort of one
one entry was in the top left that was rather
arbitrary Choice okay so but here we want to
really incorporate the idea that there's a
symmetry between rows and columns it's going to
be very important we don't want to say that the
rows are more or less important than the columns
we want to have a kind of a balance between rows
and columns it's a very important symmetry
in this story so we're going to introduce row
freeze column freeze sort of simultaneously
and we're not going to say that one of them
is more important than the other so both of
these are representations of this vexel right
here now those of you who've been watching the
series for some time will I hope so say wait wait
a minute we've seen something like this before
we've seen very much this kind of story story
before when we were talking about pols what we
called poly numbers the way we introduced Pol
numbers was very much like this in fact we had
similar kind of story we had Pol numbers sort of
going down and we had poly numbers going across
and they played somewhat different roles so yes
it's true that what we're doing here is going to
connect very directly with poly numbers and we
will get back to that all right so we keep that in
our minds um the understanding that we're gaining
here will be useful in other situations as well
so we have vexels and now we have this idea of a
freeze which is the one-dimensional analog of a
screen and we have this idea of representing uh
a vexel with a multiplicity list essentially
a diagram visualized on our freeze and so now
where does a vector fit into this story well
well a vector plays a very analogous role to
that of a matrix once we have maxel then
we saw that a matrix could be thought of
as a picture of a maxle so what you get when
you have a maxel and you decide to put it in
a in a frame in a in a box take want to take a
picture of it so you bound it not just by its
natural boundaries but also some arbitrary other
boundaries there and you got have a rectangle and
say that is now a matrix but it's a little
bit arbitrary so exactly the same thing as
happening here so a vector for us now
can be thought of as just a picture of a
vexel so here's our vexel V 13 we saw we had two
different ways of representing that on a freeze
either a row freeze or column freeze and then
Associated to that we could take a picture of
that representation so in terms of the row freeze
we could take the coefficients 203 and put Brack
around them just identify them of truncate the
rest and say ah look there's a vector this Vector
corresponds to this vexel fair enough or you could
alternatively come along and say well we want to
think about a column freeze we're going to choose
this Vector 203 as representing the same vexel so
the vexil V can be Associated or is associated to
a row vector this one here or perhaps to a column
Vector so in mathematics there's a lot
of ambiguity perhaps even confusion
about the role of vectors okay so there's various
Concepts which get intermingled in a not entirely
straightforward fashion so there's Notions of
vectors and then a little while later you find
out there's things called row vectors and column
vectors and sometimes they're sort of the same and
sometimes they're quite different and then on
other occasions you think of vectors as being
just special kinds of matrices okay so sometimes
matrices and vectors are different beasts and
sometimes vectors are just special cases of
matrices so we say that a vector is like an
N by1 Matrix or a 1 byn Matrix and then of course
we have this this idea of RN where we empoy this
red herring of the real number system which is
uh completely beyond what we're doing here right
um complete another fantasy talking about RN okay
even though the linear algebra books are all full
of things like this so when they talk about
vectors like they say talk about R3 that this
is a vector in R3 it's complete fantasy right
obviously there's integers here and not real
numbers if there were real numbers then these
entries would go on infinitely and there's no
chance you'd have at all of writing them down
okay so we say RN but in fact 99% of the time
we write down and think about integral examples
or perhaps rational examples it's a big cheat in
any case there's some confusion and there's um a
kind of an flexibility and an unwillingness to pin
down exactly what the words mean all right so for
us our orientation is going to be that the vexel
is really the primary concept here that's really
at the heart of the story at a foundational level
okay that's a very powerful point of view so
from this point of view we're going to replace
the usual idea of this hierarchy of linear spaces
which permeates modern linear algebra the idea
that there's a one-dimensional space of vectors
there's a two-dimensional space of vectors with
the threedimensional space of vectors and so on
V1 V2 V3 or maybe R1 R2 R3 Etc it's a hierarchy
so we're going to replace this idea with the idea
that there's really just a single realm of vexels
that encompasses all of these vectors really at
the same time so these are all just sort of slic
or views or or partial um partial visions of this
bigger picture so for example here's a vector W
5132 traditionally written down here's another
Vector u12 traditionally written down so in most
linear algebra treatments these are thought of
as living quite separate spaces this is living
in a four-dimensional space somewhere this is
living in a two-dimensional space somewhere and
they don't really mix they're quite different
creatures but for us these are just pictures
of the actual underlying fundamental objects which
are data structures so this W is really this m set
of Singletons the five represents that there's
five Singleton ones one represents there's one
Singleton two and there are three Singleton 3es
and there are two Singleton fours this really
is the m set that's represented from this data
structure point of view by this vector and this
Vector here represents this m set 1 2 2 that's an
M set that's an M set they're all living in the
world of M sets of these Singletons in particular
we can add them we can take linear combinations we
can do lots of things with these M sets at the
same time we don't have to keep them separate
we can see that there's a difference between this
one and this one in terms of their supports this
one is supported on the ones and the twos this one
supported on 1 2 3 4 so the supports are different
but algebraically they're still part of this
same story so the mset point of view is very very
powerful we are going to be interested in vexels
for a number of reasons but one very immediate
reason is because we want to study the idea of the
rank of a maxle so it turns out that a maxle m has
Associated to it a distinguished number it's the
most important number associated to a maxle so if
you're given a maxle m almost the first question
that you should ask about it then sort of roughly
you know where is it is what is its rank so
the rank of the maxle we'll denoted rank m is
a natural number or possibly zero the definition
is somewhat subtle and to set it up we are going
to use vexels so the idea of vexel is a is a tool
that we're going to use to explore maxel so here's
the uh roughly the story of what we're going to do
so here's a maxle okay it's seem arbitrary maxle
it turns out that this maxel has rank three that's
not at all obvious if you just look at it it turns
out that if a maxel has this shape then it's the
maximum rank it could have is four but this does
not have rank four it happens to have rank three
and that says a lot about the the max it's a very
important Concept in linear algebra okay so to
get at this notion of rank so I'm going to explain
this my next video but to get at it we are going
to be looking at Associated vexels so what we're
going to do is we're going to look at rows of this
maxle for example this third row right here see
that third row 74 25 23 we're going to think about
taking those entries and S of peeling them off to
create a onedimensional version of a maxle namely
a vexel right and the vexel is 74 2523 and we're
going to say that this is the third row of the
maxle m so the third row of maxle M is this vexel
and correspondingly if we say take the second
column that'll be C2 C2 of M it's the second
column of them will be this vexel so here
the vexel occurs as a row vexel and here
the vexel occurs as a column vexel okay but
uh basically this is the idea that we want
to think about rows of these uh maxel but we
want to think of those rows as really living
in this one-dimensional kind of world of vexels
rather than as special types of maxel in this
two-dimensional situation because ultimately
we want to compare this row with this row we
want to talk about linear combinations of
rows or of columns and to do that it's most
convenient if we work in this really truly
sort of one-dimensional story uh contained
in the world of vexels okay so that's roughly
where we're going to go in our next video where
we're going to carry on uh talk about the rank of
a matrix and the role vexels in understanding that
very important notion I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
[Music]